



  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




  Great Smoky
  Mountains
  NATIONAL PARK

  TENNESSEE—NORTH CAROLINA
  OPEN ALL YEAR

  [Illustration: stream in woods]

  UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE
  INTERIOR · Douglas McKay, _Secretary_
  NATIONAL PARK SERVICE · Conrad L. Wirth, _Director_




  Great Smoky
  Mountains
  NATIONAL PARK

  The National Park System, of which this park is a unit, is
  dedicated to conserving the scenic, scientific, and historic
  heritage of the United States for the benefit and enjoyment of its
  people.


Great Smoky Mountains National Park is located on the crest of the
high divide which forms the boundary between Tennessee and North
Carolina. This mountain range, representing one of the oldest uplands
on earth, zigzags through the park from northeast to southwest for 71
miles, or 54 miles by air line. For 36 miles along its main crest the
range maintains an altitude in excess of 5,000 feet. Sixteen of its
peaks rise more than 6,000 feet. The deep blue haze rising from the
valleys to the summits of the lofty peaks gives these mountains their
name.

[Illustration: _View from Heintooga Overlook._]

Renowned for its splendid forests and containing a rich variety
of plant life, the Great Smokies region has long been regarded by
prominent botanists as the cradle of the present vegetation of
eastern America.

Arnold Guyot, eminent scientist whose exploration of the Appalachian
System began a century ago, was the first to describe the Great Smoky
Mountains from personal observation. He wrote:

“Although the high peaks of the Smoky mountains are some fifty feet
lower than the isolated and almost exceptional group of the Black
mountains, by their number, their magnitude, the continuity and
general elevation of the chains, and of the base upon which they
repose, they are like a massive and high citadel which is really the
culminating region of all the Appalachian System.”




History of the Park


Prior to the start of the 20th century, the area now comprising
the park was little known to the outside world, although DeSoto is
believed to have viewed the mountains. They were, and still are, the
home of the Cherokees who now occupy the Cherokee Indian Reservation
in North Carolina, adjacent to the park on the south. The few white
settlers were the rugged mountaineer descendants of colonists from
England and Scotland who lived isolated and primitive lives. The
Great Smokies region became better known during and subsequent to
World War I when logging railroads of lumber companies penetrated
some of its virgin forests. Still later, highways skirted the area
and visitors were able to view its majestic peaks from a distance.

The successful movement for the creation of a national park in this
area was begun in 1923, and its establishment was authorized by
the Federal Government by act of Congress approved May 22, 1926.
Enabling acts were passed by the State legislatures of North Carolina
and Tennessee in 1927, and land acquisition was begun with State
funds, matched by a generous donation made by John D. Rockefeller,
Jr., through the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, in honor of
his mother. Subsequently, Federal funds were made available for the
completion of the project.

On February 6, 1930, the Governors of North Carolina and Tennessee
presented the Secretary of the Interior with deeds to an initial
158,876 acres of land on behalf of their respective States. A limited
park was thus established for administration and protection. The
park, now containing 507,168 acres of Federal lands, was formally
dedicated on September 2, 1946.




Pioneer Culture in the Great Smokies


Great Smoky Mountains National Park presents an opportunity to
preserve frontier conditions of a century ago. The cultural and human
interest aspects of this park are exceeded only by its scenery and
natural history.

In places where the forest has not yet encroached upon them, there
are clearings which were the sloping little farms of the mountain
pioneers. Sturdy log structures in varying stages of disintegration
remain there as evidence of a way of life which has practically
disappeared in eastern United States. Some of these log cabins,
barns, and other buildings have been rehabilitated in place so that
you may see the original structures in their true setting. Most of
them are in Cades Cove, where the park’s only grist mill powered by
an overshot wheel is located. Cades Cove, an isolated, oval-shaped
valley surrounded by mountains, is a region of outstanding pastoral
charm which you should visit.

Some of the finest of various types of authentic pioneer structures
have been assembled in the immediate vicinity of the Oconaluftee
Ranger Station and Pioneer Museum, located on the cross-mountain
highway about 2 miles north of Cherokee, N. C. On display in the
museum are tools, household objects, and a variety of other handmade
items which were used by the pioneers who made their homes on lands
which now comprise the park. This building is open from 9 a. m. to 5
p. m., April through October.




The Cherokee Indian Reservation


You will be interested in the Cherokee Indians on the Cherokee
Reservation, which is immediately south of the park. Although the
Government has instituted here a comprehensive system of education
and modern methods of living, ancient ceremonies and sports are
preserved as tribal customs.

[Illustration:

  THOMPSON PHOTO

_Rhododendron along the trail to Mount Le Conte._]




Forests


Crowning the highest peaks with spruce and fir and carpeting the
mountainsides with a wealth of deciduous trees is an unbroken
forest cover, which cannot be matched in eastern America. In all of
Europe there are not as many species of native trees as are to be
found in Great Smoky Mountains National Park. A number of these,
such as Canada hemlock, silverbell, red spruce, yellow buckeye, and
mountain-ash grow to record size, while others become giants of their
kind. Approximately 40 percent of the more than half-million acres
which comprise the park are in the original forested condition. A
total of 130 native tree species are known to grow in this area.




Other Plant Life


Few, if any, areas in the eastern United States possess so great a
variety of plants. Altogether, the tree, shrub, and herb varieties
total more than 1,300. Botanists have also listed over 1,800 species
of fungi, 330 mosses and liverworts, and 230 lichens. The earliest
flowers occasionally appear by the close of February in lowland
areas, while the witchhazel, latest to bloom, may hold its blossoms
into December. Late April finds the spring flowers, including the
abundant dogwood, at their blossoming peak; May is best for the
mountain laurel; middle June usually finds both the flame azalea and
rose-purple rhododendron at their finest; middle July is likely to be
the peak of the great white rhododendron’s flowering. Autumn colors
are excellent throughout October, with the height of coloration near
the end of the month.




A Wildlife Sanctuary


Here, as in all national parks, wildlife is given complete
protection. No hunting or trapping is permitted. Since establishment
of the park, the black bear population has increased considerably, and
such animals as the white-tailed deer, red and gray foxes, raccoon,
bobcat, wild turkey, ruffed grouse, and others find sanctuary in
these mountains. More than 52 species of fur-bearing animals, some
200 birds, 36 reptiles, 37 amphibians, and 80 fishes are known to
live here.

=The feeding, touching, teasing, or molesting of bears is
prohibited.= This regulation is enforced strictly for the protection
of the public. Persons using park trails have nothing to fear from
unmolested bears. If tempted by food, however, some bears, which
frequent sections of the motor road, become dangerous. They should
not be fed or approached. Persons using the Appalachian Trail
shelters can protect their food supplies by suspending them from tree
limbs outside the shelter.




Fishing


Approximately 600 miles of streams, many of them well suited to
trout, flow down the slopes of the Great Smoky Mountains. Each year
thousands of hatchery-reared trout are released in the more heavily
fished waters. Rainbow and brook trout and small-mouth bass lure the
devotees of Izaak Walton. Persons fishing in park waters must have
the State or county license issued and required by North Carolina, or
the State license issued and required by Tennessee, depending upon
the section of the park being fished. Catches are regulated, and some
streams may be found closed for restocking. The fishing season is
from May 16 to August 31. Current regulations may be obtained from
the office of the superintendent or from park rangers or wardens.




Interpretive Service


Beginning in May and continuing for 6 months, a program of
naturalist-guided field trips and talks is available. This service is
maintained by the Government and is free to the public.

Naturalists meet hikers at designated points in or near the park and
conduct visits to outstanding objectives over good trails. Plant and
animal life is discussed informally along the way. There are several
types of walks ranging from 2 hours to all day. Illustrated talks are
given in the evenings at regular intervals, chiefly in hotel lobbies
and other points of visitor-concentration.

Programs describing the nature-guide service are available
(May-October) at headquarters and at Oconaluftee Ranger Station and
are posted in hotels and various places throughout the park.




Accommodations


Free modern campgrounds are provided on the Tennessee side of the
park at the Chimney Tops, 6 miles south of Gatlinburg, and Cades
Cove, 7 miles from the Townsend entrance to the park; on the North
Carolina side at Smokemont, on the transmountain highway, Balsam
Mountain, 10 miles from Soco Gap on U. S. 19 (Blue Ridge Parkway
spur), and Deep Creek, 2 miles from Bryson City. Aside from these
campgrounds, the only accommodations in the park are at Le Conte
Lodge on the top of Mount Le Conte, accessible only by foot or
horseback. For reservations and rates, write Jack Huff, Gatlinburg,
Tenn.

A number of hotel and tourist courts are available in cities and
towns near the park, and at Knoxville and Asheville. Inquiries
regarding these accommodations should be addressed to Knoxville
Tourist Bureau, Henley Street, Knoxville, Tenn.; East Tennessee
Automobile Club, Knoxville, Tenn., Chambers of Commerce of
Gatlinburg, Knoxville, and Maryville, Tenn., Asheville, Waynesville,
Bryson City, and Sylva, N. C.; Cherokee Association, Cherokee, N. C.;
and Government Services, Inc., Fontana Village, Fontana Dam, N. C.




Administration


Great Smoky Mountains National Park is administered by the National
Park Service of the United States Department of the Interior. A
superintendent, whose address is Gatlinburg, Tenn., is in immediate
charge. Park headquarters are located 2 miles south of Gatlinburg.
A member of the protection division maintains headquarters at
Oconaluftee Ranger Station, N. C., on U. S. 441; post office,
Cherokee, N. C.

[Illustration:

  THOMPSON PHOTO

_Newfound Gap, highest point on the transmountain highway._]




Help Us Protect This Park


Please note the following requirements which are necessary for the
protection of the natural beauties of the park, as well as for your
comfort and convenience:

The park is a sanctuary for all living things. It is a violation of
the law to destroy, injure, or disturb trees, shrubs, flowers, birds,
animals, or any natural feature in the park.

The speed limit is 35 miles an hour, unless otherwise posted. Drive
carefully; keep to the right. Report all accidents to a park ranger.

Camping or lighting fires at places other than designated campgrounds
or picnic areas is not allowed, except by permit. To camp in remote
sections of the park, except during periods of high fire hazard,
permits may be secured at the office of the superintendent, the
Oconaluftee Ranger Station, or from the district park rangers or
wardens. Camping is restricted to certain periods at the campgrounds.
Individual sites provided with fireplaces and water are available.

Please help to keep the park clean. Do not scatter papers, picnic
remnants, and the like; use trash receptacles along roads, in picnic
areas, and campgrounds.

Fire is one of the greatest dangers to the park. Put out fires
completely upon leaving. Be sure cigarettes and matches are out
before disposal. Lunches may be eaten along roadsides, but fires
should not be built.

Only those persons having special permits may collect botanical or
geological specimens in the park. Such permits may be secured by
competent scientists upon application to the superintendent.

Dogs and cats are permitted in the park if on leash, crated, or
otherwise under physical restrictive control at all times.

The feeding, touching, teasing, or molesting of bears is prohibited.

Deliberate infraction of park regulations may bring penalty of fine
or imprisonment or both.


[Illustration: Memorial Plaque

  The founders of Great Smoky Mountains National Park are honored
  with a memorial at Newfound Gap, on the North Carolina-Tennessee
  line. A bronze plaque on a high terrace wall of the memorial bears
  the following inscription:

  “=FOR THE PERMANENT ENJOYMENT OF THE PEOPLE—This Park Was Given
  One-half By The Peoples And States of North Carolina And Tennessee
  And By The United States of America And One-Half In Memory of Laura
  Spelman Rockefeller By The Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial
  Founded By Her Husband John D. Rockefeller.=”]

  Revised 1954      16—53420-6      GPO

[Illustration: GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS NATIONAL PARK]

COMPLETELY EXTINGUISH MATCHES AND CIGARETTES BEFORE THROWING AWAY.
BE SURE CAMPFIRE IS OUT BEFORE LEAVING IT.
ALWAYS USE CAR ASHTRAYS.
LET'S NOT BE GUILTY OF STARTING A FOREST FIRE.


                                 |               From—
                                 +————————————+——————————+—————————
               To—               | Gatlinburg | Cherokee | Townsend
                                 |  entrance  | entrance | entrance
  ———————————————————————————————+————————————+——————————+—————————
                                 |   _Miles_  |  _Miles_ | _Miles_
  Park Headquarters              |      1.5   |    28.3  |   18.5
  Pioneer Museum and Oconaluftee |     27.9   |     1.9  |   45.9
    Ranger Station               |            |          |
  Chimneys Campground            |      6.5   |    23.6  |   23.5
  Smokemont Campground           |     24.6   |     5.2  |   41.5
  Balsam Mountain Campground     |     53.3   |    23.5  |   71.3
                                 |            |          |
  Cades Cove Campground          |     26.0   |    63.0  |    7.7
                                 |            |          |
  Deep Creek Campground          |     45.8   |    16.0  |   63.8
                                 |            |          |
  Heintooga Ridge Picnic Area    |     53.8   |    24.0  |   71.8
  Chimneys Footbridge            |      8.7   |    21.1  |   25.7
  Alum Cave Parking Area         |     10.5   |    19.3  |   27.5
  Cherokee Orchard               |      4.7   |    35.5  |   24.7
  Newfound Gap                   |     15.0   |    14.8  |   42.0
                                 |            |          |
  Indian Gap                     |     16.3   |    16.1  |   43.3
  Forney Ridge Parking Area      |     22.5   |    22.3  |   49.5
                                 |            |          |
  Fighting Creek Gap             |      4.6   |    31.4  |   15.4
  Cherokee Indian Reservation    |     31.3   |     1.5  |   48.5
  Little River Gorge             |      5.8   |    32.5  |    1.0
                                 |            |          |
  Cades Cove                     |     26.0   |    63.0  |    7.7
  Tremont “Y”                    |     18.2   |    45.0  |    0.7
  Greenbrier                     |     11.0   |    43.0  |   31.0
  Cosby                          |     23.1   |    52.0  |   43.1
  Cataloochee                    |     50.4   |    60.5  |   70.4
  Loop trip around western end   |    165.0   |   165.0  |  165.0
    of park                      |            |          |
  ———————————————————————————————+————————————+——————————+—————————


               To—      |Elevation|        Remarks                | Map
                        |         |                               |Index
  ——————————————————————+—————————+———————————————————————————————+———————
                        |  _Feet_ |                               |
  Park Headquarters     |   1,463 | Office of superintendent      | F-2.
  Pioneer Museum and    |   2,025 | Museum; park office,          | I-4.
    Oconaluftee Ranger  |         |   North Carolina section      |
    Station             |         |                               |
  Chimneys Campground   |   2,750 | In Tennessee section on       | G-3.
                        |         |   U. S. 441                   |
  Smokemont Campground  |   2,198 | In North Carolina section on  | I-4.
                        |         |   U. S. 441                   |
  Balsam Mountain       |   5,340 | In North Carolina section;    | J-4.
    Campground          |         |   11.3 miles north            |
                        |         |   of U. S. 19                 |
  Cades Cove Campground |   1,960 | In Tennessee section; 7 miles | C-3.
                        |         |   south of Tennessee Route 73 |
  Deep Creek Campground |   1,800 | In North Carolina section; 2.1| G-5.
                        |         |   miles north of U. S. 19     |
  Heintooga Ridge       |   5,325 | Excellent mountain vistas     | J-4.
    Picnic Area         |         |                               |
  Chimneys Footbridge   |   3,550 | At parking area above lower   | G-3.
                        |         |   tunnel                      |
  Alum Cave Parking     |   3,850 | Trail to Alum Cave Bluffs     | G-3.
    Area                |         |   and Mount Le Conte          |
  Cherokee Orchard      |   2,550 | Trails to Mount Le Conte and  | G-2.
                        |         |   Rainbow Falls               |
  Newfound Gap          |   5,048 | Where U. S. 441 crosses       | G-3.
                        |         |   Smokies, Appalachian Trail, |
                        |         |   and Clingmans Dome Highway  |
  Indian Gap            |   5,266 | Historic pass through Smokies | G-3.
  Forney Ridge Parking  |   6,311 | Clingmans Dome Trail          | G-4.
    Area                |         |                               |
  Fighting Creek Gap    |   2,320 | Trail to Laurel Falls and     | F-2.
                        |         |   Cove Mountain               |
  Cherokee Indian       |   1,900 | Eastern band of Cherokee      | I-5.
    Reservation         |         |   Indians                     |
  Little River Gorge    |   2,000 | Scenic drive                  |E-2 and
                        |to 1,100 |                               | D-2.
  Cades Cove            |   1,807 | Extensive level area          | C-3.
                        |         |   surrounded by mountains     |
  Tremont “Y”           |   1,147 | Junction of Cades Cove and    | D-3.
                        |         |   Little River Roads          |
  Greenbrier            |   1,680 | Trails into area of excellent | H-2.
                        |         |   forests and streams         |
  Cosby                 |   2,459 | Northeastern section of park, | J-1.
                        |         |   Tennessee side              |
  Cataloochee           |   2,643 | Excellent scenic drive,       | K-3.
                        |         |   eastern section of park     |
  Loop trip around      |   ...   | One-day drive, Gatlinburg to  |
    western end of park |         |   park headquarters, Elkmont, |
                        |         |   Townsend, Maryville, Tapoca,|
                        |         |   Bryson City, Cherokee, and  |
                        |         |   Gatlinburg                  |
  ——————————————————————+—————————+———————————————————————————————+———————




How To Reach the Park


Paved highways from all States converge at Knoxville, Tenn., and
Asheville, N. C. Bus lines maintain service to both cities. The
Southern Railway and the Louisville & Nashville Railroad serve
Knoxville; the former also serves Asheville. Knoxville may also be
reached by American, Capital (PCA), and Delta Airlines; Asheville,
by Capital (PCA), Delta, and Piedmont Airlines. Trailways buses make
seven trips each way, daily, between Knoxville and Asheville, going
through the park via Gatlinburg and Cherokee. North Carolina towns
bordering the park may be reached by direct buses from Atlanta and
Chattanooga. Excursions by bus also may be made from Knoxville,
stopping overnight at Gatlinburg and continuing to Knoxville via
Maryville, Tenn. Smoky Mountain Tours, Inc., with offices in both
Knoxville and Asheville, operate personally conducted sightseeing
stages through the park between the two cities frequently during
the summer. The Southern Railway offers both one-way and round-trip
tickets, providing travel by bus through the park between Knoxville
and Asheville.




The Seasons


Summer days are usually warm or hot in the lowland areas and cool in
the higher mountains; the nights are cool.

Spring arrives early in the lowland areas and progressively later at
higher elevations. Weather conditions are particularly favorable in
autumn, with less rainfall at that season. Winters are variable, both
as to severity and length, but they normally are mild in the lowlands.

Rain, snow, and fog often are encountered in the mountains during the
winter. Roads are kept open all year, but the transmountain highway
sometimes is closed for a few hours during heavy snow or sleet storms
when snowplows cannot keep it open. Snows are infrequent in the park,
but you should take chains if you plan to drive through in winter.
Roads are posted if driving conditions are unfavorable.




Horses, Pack Animals, and Guide Service


In some of the towns bordering the park, horses and pack animals,
with guide service, may be rented by the hour, day, or for longer
periods.

          Destination        |         Trail starts         |Elevation
  ———————————————————————————+——————————————————————————————+————————
                             |                              | _Feet_
  Laurel Falls               |Fighting Creek Gap (see Road  |  2,500
                             |  Distances)                  |
  Clingmans Dome Summit      |Forney Ridge Parking Area     |  6,643
  Andrews Bald               |Forney Ridge Parking Area     |  5,860
  Alum Cave Bluffs           |Alum Cave Parking Area (see   |  4,900
                             |  Road Distances)             |
  Mount Le Conte: via Alum   |Alum Cave Parking Area (see   |  6,593
      Cave Bluffs            |  Road Distances)             |
    via Boulevard            |Newfound Gap (see Road        |  6,593
                             |  Distances)                  |
    via Cherokee Orchard     |Cherokee Orchard via Rainbow  |  6,593
                             |  Falls                       |
                             |Cherokee Orchard via Bullhead |  6,593
                             |Cherokee Orchard via Trillium |  6,593
                             |  Gap                         |
    via Roaring Fork         |Gatlinburg and Trillium Gap   |  6,593
  The Jumpoff                |Newfound Gap                  |  6,100
  Charlies Bunion            |Newfound Gap                  |  5,375
  Gregory Bald               |Cades Cove                    |  4,948
  Chimney Tops               |Chimneys Bridge (see Road     |  4,755
                             |  Distances)                  |
  Mount Cammerer             |Davenport Gap                 |  5,025
  Ramsey Cascades            |Greenbrier                    |  4,750
  Raven Fork Wilderness      |Smokemont                     |  4,202
  Mount Sterling Tower       |Mount Sterling Gap            |  5,835
  Sharp Top on Noland Divide |Bryson City (at park line)    |  3,430
  Bryson Place               |Bryson City                   |  2,411
  ———————————————————————————+——————————————————————————————+————————

                       | Distance |                                 | Map
     Destination       |round trip|      Remarks                    |Index
  —————————————————————+——————————+—————————————————————————————————+—————
                       | _Miles_  |                                 |
  Laurel Falls         |    2.5   | One of the most popular hiking  | E-2.
                       |          |   trips                         |
  Clingmans Dome Summit|    1.0   | One-half mile paved trail leads | G-4.
                       |          |   to one of the highest peaks   |
                       |          |   in East; highest in park.     |
  Andrews Bald         |    4.0   | One of the most popular hikes   | G-4.
                       |          |   in park.                      |
  Alum Cave Bluffs     |    5.0   | Easy trail, fine views. Best    | G-3.
                       |          |   for rose-purple rhododendron  |
                       |          |   in mid-June. Alum Cave Bluffs.|
  Mount Le Conte: via  |   10.4   | Shortest way to Mount Le Conte  | G-3.
                       |          |   and very spectacular.         |
      Alum Cave Bluffs |          |   Foot trail only.              |
    via Boulevard      |   16.0   | Follows Appalachian Trail to    | G-3.
                       |          |   Mount Kephart and             |
                       |          |   thence along Boulevard Trail  |
                       |          |   to Le Conte.                  |
    via Cherokee       |   13.4   | Trail passes Rainbow Falls and  | G-3.
      Orchard          |          |   around Rocky Spur.            |
                       |   14.4   | Trail passes around Bullhead.   | G-3.
                       |          |                                 |
                       |   16.8   | Good horse trail.               | G-3.
    via Roaring Fork   |   22.4   | Longest trip to Mount Le Conte, | G-3.
                       |          |   but interesting.              |
  The Jumpoff          |    6.5   | Jagged mountain peaks.          | H-3.
  Charlies Bunion      |    8.6   | Reminiscent of the rugged       | H-3.
                       |          |   Rockies.                      |
  Gregory Bald         |   11.0   | Best display of wild azalea in  | B-4.
                       |          |   mid-June.                     |
  Chimney Tops         |    3.0   | For the experienced hiker.      | G-3.
                       |          |   3 hours, round trip.          |
  Mount Cammerer       |   12.0   | Fine view of valleys and        | K-1.
                       |          |   mountains.                    |
  Ramsey Cascades      |   12.0   | Largest cascades; stands of     | I-2.
                       |          |   virgin hardwoods.             |
  Raven Fork Wilderness|   16.0   | Largest stand of virgin red     | J-3.
                       |          |   spruce and balsam.            |
  Mount Sterling Tower |    5.2   | Accessible fire tower.          | K-2.
  Sharp Top on Noland  |    4.0   | Interesting hike.               | G-5.
    Divide             |          |                                 |
  Bryson Place         |   20.0   | Follows Deep Creek to Bryson    | H-4.
                       |          |   Place, and Nettle  Creek into |
                       |          |   a fine stand of virgin        |
                       |          |   hardwoods.                    |
  —————————————————————+——————————+—————————————————————————————————+—————




Roads and Trails


There are 66 miles of high standard roads in the park including the
transmountain highway from Gatlinburg, Tenn., to Cherokee, N. C.
Clingmans Dome Highway reaches an altitude of 6,311 feet. Seventy
miles of secondary roads and 653 miles of horse and foot trails are
available for hiking and riding.

The park highways offer exceptional opportunities to view the
grandeur of the Great Smokies. Spur roads and trails lead to many
points of interest.

There are trails of all types to suit your individual requirements.
Some are 4 feet wide on easy gradients; some are improved footpaths;
others merely tracks through the forest. Park forces try to keep
trails drained and clear of brush and other obstacles; but the
country is rough, and hikers should wear suitable outdoor clothing,
including stout low-heeled shoes. If you are an inexperienced hiker,
you should be especially careful and watch your footing on the
trails.




The Appalachian Trail


The Appalachian Trail crosses the park and follows the ridge of the
Smokies for most of its 71 miles. The eastern portion, from Davenport
Gap at the northeast corner to Newfound Gap on the transmountain
highway, is 31 miles long and follows through an absolute wilderness.
The western portion from Newfound Gap to Fontana Dam just outside
the park, is 40 miles long. Most of the trail is over 5,000 feet in
elevation.

There are 7 trailside shelters and 3 trailside campsites along the
71-mile section of the Appalachian Trail in this park from Davenport
Gap to Newfound Gap (31 miles) and Newfound Gap to Fontana Dam (40
miles). These are nearly equally spaced for 1-day hiking trips.
Shelters are closed on 3 sides and provide simple bunk accommodations
for 6 persons. A fireplace is in front and water is available nearby.
Use of the shelters is normally restricted to 1 night. Camping is
permitted along the trail only at the above points and a camping
permit for each trip is required. (See page 8.) Because of the
scarcity of fuel at these sites, you are advised to carry primus-type
stoves.
